.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2022 Graeme Walker <graeme_walker@users.sourceforge.net>
.\" 
.\" This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH EMAILRELAY-FILTER-COPY 1 local
.SH NAME
emailrelay-filter-copy \- an emailrelay filter program for pop-by-name
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B emailrelay-filter-copy
.I <emailrelay-content-file>
.LP
.B emailrelay-filter-copy
-d
.I <spool-directory>
.LP
.B emailrelay-filter-copy
[--help]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I emailrelay-filter-copy
utility can be used as an
.B E-MailRelay
.I "--filter"
program to copy e-mail messages from the main spool directory into
all available sub-directories. When using the
.I "--pop-by-name"
feature of the
.B E-MailRelay
server this results in messages being copied to all POP clients.
.LP
Only the message envelope is copied; the content file stays in
the main directory. If the envelope is successfully copied to
one or more sub-directories then it is removed from the main
spool directory and it will therefore not be available for SMTP
forwarding.
.LP
When using
.I "-d"
all envelope files in the spool directory are copied to all
sub-directories. This should be used after using
.B emailrelay-submit
has deposited an envelope file into the main spool
directory, or perhaps periodically from cron.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR emailrelay (1),
.SH AUTHOR
Graeme Walker, mailto:graeme_walker@users.sourceforge.net
