.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2024 Graeme Walker <graeme_walker@users.sourceforge.net>
.\" 
.\" This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH EMAILRELAY-PASSWD 1 local
.SH NAME
emailrelay-passwd \- a password encoding utility for emailrelay
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B emailrelay-passwd
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I emailrelay-passwd
is a utility which reads a single plaintext password from the standard
input, and writes out an encoded form onto the standard
output. The encoded form is suitable for pasting into a "md5"
line in an
.B emailrelay
secrets file.
.LP
A secrets file containing two CRAM-MD5 passwords might look like
this:
.LP
#
.br
# emailrelay.auth
.br
#
.br
server md5 alice Oqng9/H7wAyKgbuqw5VzG1bNO6feqtblyiNEi6QuN5dH
.br
server md5 bob Ot6SDdGj23eWjdEuKICgN8Nj9z/Vx9IV3ISz9VvmnaUB
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-H, --hash \fI<function>\fR
Specifies the hash function, such as MD5 or SHA1. MD5 is the default, and a hash function of NONE does simple xtext encoding. Other hash function may or may not be available, depending on the build.
.TP
.B \-h, --help
Shows help text and exits.
.TP
.B \-b, --base64
The input password is interpreted as being Base64 encoded.
.TP
.B \-d, --dotted
Generates a dotted decimal format, for backwards compatibility.
.TP
.B \-p, --password \fI<pwd>\fR
Specifies the password to be hashed. Beware of leaking sensitive passwords via command-line history or the process-table when using this option.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR emailrelay (1),
.BR emailrelay-submit (1),
.br
.B RFC-2104
.br
.B RFC-2195
.SH AUTHOR
Graeme Walker <graeme_walker@users.sourceforge.net>
